How to get a job
1.Reflect on your career aspirations. ...
2.Research potential industries and job roles. ...
3.Identify your transferable skills. ...
4.Build your social media presence. ...
5.Conduct informational interviews. ...
6.Tailor your resume. ...
7.Write a customized cover letter. ...
8.Prepare for the interview mindfully.
How to Get a Job: 10 Effective Tips to Land Your Next Role
作者：Coursera Staff • 更新于 Nov 29, 2023
分享
Make the most of your job search with these best practices, whether you're switching careers or looking for your first job.

Looking for a new job? Or perhaps your first job ever? There are certain practices to consider when applying for jobs that can help you stand out from other candidates with similar educational or professional experiences.
In the past decade, a boom in technology has influenced the economy, including the largest growth and adoption of internet usage since the late 1990s. The types of jobs available have shifted as a result, as well as the ways we search for them in the digital age. These days, many people turn to Google for advice on their job search, and LinkedIn and other job sites to find job openings.
It’s a good time to apply for jobs and to build the skills you’ll need in your dream career. This article offers effective tips and best practices for getting a job.
How to get a job
There are many ways to get a job. Approaches vary depending on the type of job you’re after, and the industry and competitiveness of the job. Some may find networking and personal connections effective in their job search, but many people rely on the traditional approach of applying to and interviewing for a job. The process can be daunting, but these strategies can help you gain clarity and confidence as you embark on your journey.
1. Reflect on your career aspirations.
While you might try to sit down and apply for any job that you’re qualified for, taking the time to assess your career hopes and dreams can be a more satisfying and productive way to start a job search. Thinking about what makes you come alive can help you narrow down your search to target specific roles and careers.
Read more: How to Answer “What Are Your Career Aspirations?”
Envision your career future. Here are some questions that can help you:

Are you passionate about a certain cause or industry? (Perhaps you get excited about supporting theatre arts or are interested in finance in emerging markets.)


Do you want to become a leader of a team or organization, or do you prefer to be a creative and independent producer?


What salary goals do you have? Do you aspire to earn a six-figure salary? 


Do you value team cohesion and collaboration?


What kind of lifestyle do you want?


What skills do you bring to a job role? (For example, do you have a knack for persuading people through spoken or written communication, or are your skills more suited for patient care?)

2. Research potential industries and job roles.
Next, think about the types of industries or roles that you either have experience in or that pique your interest. Research everything you can about the food and beverage industry, for example, if that’s a business area that interests you. Have you considered a career in IT, data analysis, marketing, or UX design?
Say you have a degree in marketing; are you interested in pursuing a career in that field? If so, do you want to work for an agency or in-house for a company or non-profit? What type of marketing do you hope to specialize in—perhaps social media marketing, digital marketing, or content marketing? Drill down in your search to understand the different roles you could play within a field or industry.
If you’re thinking more about your lifestyle, consider remote jobs, jobs that let you travel, or jobs better suited for introverts.
3. Identify your transferable skills.
Once you have a better idea of your career goals and what types of jobs you’re interested in, think about how your experiences can apply to these roles. Identify your transferable skills, including technical skills and workplace skills you have acquired in your personal and professional life. 
If you are seeking your first job, your transferable skills might come from extracurricular activities, volunteer work, or daily life (for example, taking care of children or siblings). For those switching jobs or changing careers, you can mine previous work experiences for technical skills like data analytics or data entry, and workplace skills like leadership, creativity, and critical thinking.
Build the right skills for the job you want
Peer into the future. Do the jobs you’re applying for fit into your desired career trajectory? If not, and your transferable skills are not enough to propel you forward, consider building your technical skills to eventually land a job that aligns your skills with your lifestyle and offers a steady paycheck.
With Coursera’s professional certificate programs, you can build the right skills for in-demand jobs in just a few months—no degree or experience required.

4. Build your social media presence.
Now, more than ever, people are finding jobs on LinkedIn. In fact, eight people are hired every minute on LinkedIn [1]. A majority of recruiters (around 87 percent) use it during the hiring process, especially when vetting candidates [2]. Your LinkedIn profile should reflect your current resume, along with links to projects, videos, and content you worked on. A professional, friendly profile photo helps recruiters put a face to the name, while a bulleted list of accomplishments using keywords can boost your credibility.
Though posting on LinkedIn is not necessarily going to get you hired, sharing and liking posts creates engagement and can help you get noticed by potential employers. If you decide to post, consider sharing pictures and summaries of projects you worked on, or articles that demonstrate your industry expertise. 
You can even reach out to recruiters on LinkedIn by sending a request to connect or messaging them using InMail. When crafting your message, explain who you are, what you’re looking for, and why you’re hoping to connect with them.
Finally, clean up your presence on other social media platforms. Delete any incriminating photos, such as smoking weed, imbibing alcohol before age 21, or any other activity that could be perceived as unprofessional. Keep your pages private for additional security. 
5. Conduct informational interviews.
Breaking into a new industry or field can be difficult, especially if you’re unsure whether that career is right for you. That’s where informational interviews come in. Job seekers can conduct this type of interview to gather insight into a prospective field or job role.
Here’s how an informational interview works:

Decide what you want to know.


Reach out and request a meeting.


Develop a list of questions to ask.


Get to know your interviewee.


Send a thank-you note.


Keep in touch.

Informational interviews build relationships, provide interviewing practice, and even open up future opportunities, especially if you make the effort to keep in touch with your interviewee.
6. Tailor your resume.
For each job you apply to, the best practice is to customize your resume to the job description. Recruiters and hiring managers like to see that you’ve understood their ethos, tone, and overall language and can speak it, too—meaning that your resume reflects their specific jargon (“creative briefs,” rather than “creative requests”). Your experiences should match the role’s requirements, and sometimes you’ll need to highlight or even omit certain skills and experiences. Always double-check your resume for spelling and grammar errors.
Read more: How to Make a Resume for Your First Job (+ Template)
Crafting your resume to demonstrate you are an ideal candidate is not enough. These days, applicant tracking systems (ATS) filter job applications, so you must make sure to strategically include exact keywords and phrases from the job description on your resume.
7. Write a customized cover letter.
This might sound like a lot of extra work, but you don’t necessarily have to write an entirely new cover letter for each job application. However, each cover letter you submit should definitely reflect your enthusiasm for the specific job you’re applying for. You can create a basic cover letter template for each type of job, and mark the places where you’ll tailor information to fit each job.
For example, if you are applying to three types of jobs, such as communications consultant, social media specialist, and marketing analyst, you can create three separate cover letter templates. In each template, list out specific skills and experiences relevant to each job type. Then, when you’re customizing your cover letter for the job, swap out your interest in one company for another, and tweak your language to fit.
8. Prepare for the interview mindfully.
The interview process can be intimidating. It is helpful to remember that an interview is a two-way street—while it may seem like you are proving your worth to an employer, it is also an opportunity to assess whether the employer and role will be fulfilling for you. Preparing for an interview can help you feel more confident, so you’ll present yourself in the best possible light.
To prepare, consider writing down or saying out loud your responses to the most common interview questions. Reflect on the role’s responsibilities, the skills needed to perform the role, and questions a hiring manager might ask to determine if you are the right fit. The role may require several interviews.
If your interview is virtual, and many initial screenings are, you might consider practicing mock interviews with a friend to ensure your tone and body language expresses your enthusiasm properly over the internet. Plus, small adjustments to your setup can make a difference. Clean up any clutter in your background, and make sure your internet, camera, and microphone are reliable and ready long before your interview begins.
Read more: Zoom Interview Tips: A Guide For Your Online Interview
If you expect the interviewer to ask structured behavioral questions, a good practice is to write down several STAR (situation, task, action, result) scenarios and describe them aloud. For panel interviews, try to remember each person’s name and make eye contact with each interviewer while you are speaking.
9. Send a thank you email.
Always, always send a follow-up email to thank your interviewers for their time. The best practice is to write a couple of sentences about any highlights from your conversation that resonated with you, and to reiterate your enthusiasm. This simple act of courtesy and gratitude doesn’t require much time but can help solidify a hiring manager’s decision to hire you.  
10. Negotiate salary and benefits.
Congrats! After the applying, preparation, interview(s), and thank you emails, you got the job. Now, it’s time to negotiate your salary and benefits. Check sites like Glassdoor for data to confirm that your salary expectations are appropriate for the industry, company, and job role. 
These days, it is culturally acceptable and even expected that you will negotiate. Chances are, the job letter comes with salary information. A good rule of thumb, when in doubt, is to negotiate 10-20% above their initial offer, in addition to the benefits package. Often, these packages will be similar for every employee of a company, but year-end bonuses, signing bonuses, and paid time off (PTO) may vary. Do your research, and feel free to clarify any questions with the hiring manager before accepting a job offer. 
Abigail’s Answer
Applying for a job can be very overwhelming if you don't know where to start. First, make sure that you have a great resume to show employers. Most people use templates on Word to create their resume. Second, know what position you want to apply for. When you decide which position you want, add it to your resume under Career Objective.

Now, you are ready to find a job. Look for employers who are hiring for the position you want to obtain. There are many ways to find employment. One way is doing a Google search for jobs near you. Another way is to download all the job apps. Such as, LinkedIn and Indeed. I would also recommend to just go to the business yourself and ask if they are hiring. By going down yourself it shows to employers that you are genuinely interested in their business.

If you are still in college, ask about any internships. Most colleges have job fairs too. Even if you don't see anything that will work for you, you are getting your name out there. I hope this helps! I wish you the best of luck in your job search!
9 Ways to Find a New Job
By 
JANET FOWLER
 
Updated December 12, 2023
Reviewed by 
EBONY HOWARD

Reviewed by Ebony Howard
Full Bio
 
Ebony Howard is a certified public accountant and a QuickBooks ProAdvisor tax expert. She has been in the accounting, audit, and tax profession for more than 13 years, working with individuals and a variety of companies in the health care, banking, and accounting industries.
Learn about our Financial Review Board 
Fact checked by KIRSTEN ROHRS SCHMITT
0 seconds of 15 secondsVolume 0%
This ad will end in 7
 
8 Most Successful Products From "Shark Tank"
CLOSE
You can use several strategies to get a new job to keep your career moving forward and to earn more money. Some of the best ways to look for a new job include networking online and in person and monitoring job site frequently. Learn more about other tips to help you find a new job.
KEY TAKEAWAYS
Networking, online and in person, can help you stay on top of what's happening in your field, including what jobs are open.
Check in on job search sites frequently.
Look for jobs that are in your specific field to take advantage of your skills set.
Don't snub temporary or freelance work, which can often lead to full-time opportunities.
1. Networking
Many of the best jobs are never advertised in what's essentially a hidden job market. These jobs are filled by candidates who learn of them by word of mouth from friends, former colleagues, and ex-bosses.
By networking, or socializing, you can improve your chances of finding an unadvertised job. Consider joining professional associations, attending alumni events, and connecting with professionals who work in your field. Take every chance you get to meet up, in person or online, with others in your field.
Online networking sites like LinkedIn allow you to broaden your network to include friends of friends. The bigger your network, the more likely you'll find out about new opportunities.1
2. Referrals
Some employers offer incentives to their employees for referring a successful candidate to the company. It's a win-win situation for everyone. You get a new job, and your contact gets a finder's fee for attracting a top-notch employee.
That's relatively rare, but there's nothing stopping you from asking a valued friend who works in your field to let you know about any openings. The working relationships you create at every job may open other doors years in the future.
3. Job Boards and Career Websites
Online job boards in which companies post job openings are a great way to find a position that matches your criteria. Anyone can access federal and state governments job boards and job banks.234
You can also use job search engines or any of a vast number of career-related websites that post job openings, such as Monster.com, Google for Jobs, CareerBuilder, and Indeed. Many other databases specialize in freelance and contract work, including People Per Hour, Upwork, Simply Hired, and Crowded.
Many industries have specialized job search sites for particular fields, like Dice for tech professionals and ArtsThread for artists. These websites function in a similar way to traditional want-ads, but they have a greater reach and a faster turnaround time.
4. Job Fairs
Job fairs are often targeted toward specific industries, although some job or recruitment fairs are more generalized. The promotional material will include a list of the organizations that will be represented.
Investigate any companies that interest you, bring a resumes and business cards, and get ready to sell yourself. Consider any conversations with recruiters as mini-interviews that can set you apart from other applicants. Some organizations may even offer on-site interviews to candidates that match their requirements.
5. Company Websites
If you know which employer you want to work for, you can go directly to the career section of its website. If you routinely search openings on its site, you could find an opportunity that matches your skills set.
Create a list of employers that you'd like to work for and visit their websites often. If you're set on working for a specific company, it may take some time to find the right opening, but it can be a great way to find your dream job.
6. Cold Calling
If you don't see any job listings posted for a company you're interested in, you might consider making a cold call. Phone or email people in the organization after finding their contact details on the company website. Ask about upcoming vacancies, and attach a copy of your resume.
Keep in mind that this kind of contact may not always be well-received. You'll be lucky to get any response at all. But there is always a chance it'll give you the inside track on upcoming vacancies.
7. Headhunters and Recruiters
If you're looking for some professional help in your job search, headhunters and recruitment agencies can help.
Many organizations hire through recruitment agencies to streamline the hiring process. Head hunters actively recruit individuals to fill specific vacancies. Payment is based on commission. Make sure you know up front whether you or the company is paying it.
Keep in mind that many high schools and colleges have job placement services that can help new graduates to develop their resumes and assist both current students and alumni with job searches.
8. Temping or Internships
Temporary employment and short-term contracts often lead to permanent positions. It's a great way to get a foot in the door or gain useful business contacts. Many recruitment agencies can assist with locating temporary or casual positions and contract work.
Internships are often a good opportunity for students who are just graduating from college. The job placement services of many schools connect their students with opportunities.
If you're just starting out and you can afford it, volunteering can be a great way to gain valuable industry contacts.
9. Creative or Outlandish Tactics
In a competitive job market, some job seekers have pulled out all the stops. Billboards, chain letters with a copy of your resume attached, or even pasting your resume to yourself and walking around the city as a human billboard are just some of the methods job-seekers have used to get noticed.
These methods may actually work, but be cautious. Be sure that your creative tactic is appropriate for the industry you're trying to break into.
How Do You Know When It's Time to Get a New Job?
There are several reasons why you may want to get a new job. If you have been in the same position with the same salary for several years, you may want to consider a new job to advance your career. If the company you work for seems financially unsound (if they have recently implement layoffs), you may want a new job for more security. If you don't feel comfortable in your workplace, such as if you are getting bullied, it may also be time to get a new job.
How Do You Actually Quit a Job?
To leave your job, you should remain professional and respectful of your employer. Try to give at least two weeks notice. Put your resignation in writing and maintain a professional tone. Accept your employer's reaction and then continue to do your best in your position until you leave the company.
What Should I Do Before Starting a New Job?
If you've been newly hired, there are a few things you can do before starting your new job. First, you can familiarize yourself with the employee handbook. You can research your colleagues on LinkedIn to help you connect with them once you start working. And you can try to learn any software your new company uses.
The Bottom Line
Finding a new job that fits your criteria and skills set can take time, but you have several avenues to explore to find the right match, from job boards to networking. If you are transitioning to a new job, remember to leave your current workplace respectfully and try to give them notice of at least two weeks in advance.
