https://images.static-collegedunia.com/public/college_data/images/entrance/entrance_brochure/1608211068Magoosh%20GRE%20Prep.pdf?fbclid=IwZXh0bgNhZW0CMTEAAR3REuGBoqAq5nEQysQCxuXPaCQ9f-hHdmAl04Mw63VGbI9k_RQrMDsNBwk_aem_ZmFrZWR1bW15MTZieXRlcw

Reading Comprehension Passage Types 1. Short passages: ten to twenty lines, usually two questions 2. Paragraph arguments: eight to twelve lines, always one question 3. Medium passages: twenty to forty lines, typically three questions 4. Long passages: fifty-plus lines, four questions The GRE Verbal reading comprehension questions can be divided into two large categories: the paragraph argument questions with shorter prompts, and the longer passages with multiple questions. The strategies that follow are relevant short, medium, and long passages. Since paragraph argument questions involve specific kinds of challenges that are different from general reading comprehension, we treat these questions separately in the later sections of this chapter.

In the second passage, we have boldfaced these signpost words. Generally speaking, they fall into three categories: Same, Opposite, Cause and Effect. 1. Same: the statement in one clause/sentence is similar to the idea that preceded it Examples: additionally, also, moreover, likewise, too, furthermore Example sentence: Researchers have found evidence that the indigenous sloth population is decreasing. Additionally, evidence shows that the native toucan population is languishing. 2. Opposite: the statement in one clause/sentence is opposite to another written idea Examples: yet, though, however, but, nonetheless, nevertheless, at the same time, notwithstanding, still, that said Example sentence: Though evidence shows that the indigenous sloth population has decreased in recent months, much of this can be attributed to seasonal variations in the animal’s numbers. 3. Cause and Effect: the idea expressed in one clause is the result of an idea discussed in an adjacent clause Examples: since, so, because, consequently, as a result, due to, given Example sentence: Given the recent destruction of the rainforest, the sloth population is deprived of its natural habitat and is rapidly decreasing in number.

Five Essential Tips for Active Reading 1. Get excited! Perhaps art forgeries interest you. But for many readers, they’re unfamiliar footing, because few of us have ever really given the topic much thought. The GRE intentionally picks such topics because they don’t want to give students with specialized knowledge an advantage. To ensure this, they select topics that can be highly esoteric (the advent of bicycle riding in nineteenth-century America is one such topic from The Official Guide to the GRE revised General Test, Second Edition). Coupled with the dense prose, these obscure topics induce boredom in many test takers. Even if they can’t stop their minds from wandering, readers nonetheless start stringing words together, losing a sense of the main ideas in each paragraph. They hope that by brute force they’ll get to the end of the passage and will have a sudden moment of enlightenment. Not very likely! By not engaging the “active-reading brain” from the beginning, readers tend to make “word salad” out of the passage. To combat this tendency, convince yourself that the topic matter is super interesting, that it rivals front-page news (the proliferation of mollusks in the South Pacific? Whoa, tell me more!). This mindset will help turn your “active-reading brain” on so that you can take advantage of the other tips. 2. Understand the big ideas in each paragraph. Each paragraph is packed with lots of information: big ideas, supporting details, qualifications, and even multiple viewpoints. As much as possible, try to mentally summarize the main idea of the paragraph—or take “mental snapshots.” Yes, this means pausing for a quick few seconds as you absorb and assimilate the information. But by gaining this deeper understanding, you’ll save time when you come to the questions because you’ll have a stronger grasp on the passage. Your goal isn’t to mentally summarize everything, but rather to get a sense of the function of each paragraph. This “paragraph sense” will allow you to know where to look for the evidence to answer the question. It will also give you a sense of how the paragraphs connect, which can be important. 3. Don’t get bogged down by the tough parts. As mentioned in the previous tip, you don’t want to spend too much time trying to understand a paragraph. Often, there’s a sentence, usually toward the end of a paragraph, that’s difficult to understand. Although it’s easy to get a feeling of dread that you’ll miss something huge if you don’t entirely understand the sentence, that’s typically not the case. If you can sum the sentence up at the level of specificity, say, of “the author is disagreeing with some aspect of theory,” that will be enough. The point is you might not even have to deal with this thorny patch of text. But if you do, then going back to the passage—which is one of the key elements of attacking questions (more on that in a later section)—will allow you to see the text with “fresh eyes” and without the cognitive load of having to read the entire passage. 4. Note any counterarguments or additional points of view. The passages—especially the long ones—will usually describe a complex issue. The author will either take a specific stance or describe a specific stance within the debate. Then, another viewpoint will be offered, a counterargument to the point the author brought up. It’s not as straightforward as the author saying, “I think that forgers cannot outsmart computer technology,” and the counterargument saying, “I think they can.” Rather, it will be far more nuanced, something along the lines of “even if forgers are unable to replicate an artist’s brushstroke, they only need to be able to do so with enough accuracy to foil a computer.” The counterargument might be “even a deviation in brushstroke that is too minor for the human eye to detect is sufficient for a computer to detect.” Again, the difference is over something very detailed in the argument—a difference in brushstrokes, if you will. A question or two on these small areas of contention often pops up. By being alert to these counterarguments the first time you read through, you give yourself a much better shot of answering the questions correctly. 5. Watch for signposts. Signposts, as we discussed earlier in this chapter, both hold the passage together and tell you where the passage is going. Knowing the signposts and how they function is a big part of active reading. If you forget the specific definition of a signpost (“notwithstanding” is commonly misconstrued, for one) or gloss over it altogether, you’ll likely misunderstand what the author is saying.

Attacking Questions Answering questions isn’t just a matter of reading the question and looking for the answer. In fact, that could result in missing a question that you might have gotten right had you followed the method below, which we call RIPHAM. Read question Yes, this one is pretty obvious. But what is important is that you read the entire question, word for word. In a timed situation, it’s easy to miss an important word or two that can lead you to misinterpret the question. And skimming the question—taking in only a few words—can lead you to reconstruct a different meaning than the one intended. Ignore answers This is much easier said than done because the answer choices are right in front of you, like a finish line at the end of the race. Yet you should think of them not as offering salvation, but as luring you with a false promise of success. The reason is that when we go directly to the answers, our brains are in “confirmation mode.” That is, we get attached to the part of the answer choice that sounds right. The test writers know this, so they create answer choices that are mostly correct, save for a word or two that makes the answer choice slightly off (we’ll talk about this later in the section on answer choice traps). Paraphrase question This step, while not always necessary, makes the next step a lot easier. What often happens is that when you read the question and head to the passage to look for supporting text, you suddenly forget what the question was asking. To prevent this from happening, take a short second to simplify what the question is asking. That way you’ll be able to “store” this information as you hunt for the supporting evidence. Hunt in the passage The answer to every reading comprehension question is always in the text. This part of the passage is called the supporting text. This might seem like an obvious point, but it’s one that many seem to forget as they struggle with two answer choices: one that’s right and one that’s almost right. It’s easy to convince yourself of either one if you stare at them long enough. But by going back to the passage, you can rely on the supporting text to help you make an informed decision. Luckily, many

Answer traps Question 1 The key to understanding answer traps is to constantly be asking yourself the following: “What makes a wrong answer choice wrong?” Most wrong answer choices will fall into one of the following categories: 1. Uses words in passage but twists the author’s meaning. One thing our brain loves is familiarity. We latch on to words and phrases we remember seeing in the passage, convincing ourselves that the answer is correct. Meanwhile, we forget to put all those words together to see that they result in a statement that’s incorrect. In other words, the test writers will twist what the author is saying while using familiar words. 2. True, but in a different part of the passage. Sometimes an answer choice is actually correct, in the sense that it is supported by the passage. The problem that it doesn’t answer the question at hand. Therefore, always read the question carefully so you know what it’s asking. 3. True in the real world, but not found in the passage. Sometimes, an answer choice will sound true, as far as common sense goes. But it won’t actually be covered in the passage. If it’s not supported by the passage, it’s incorrect. 4. Everything is right except one thing. We call this the “rotten fruit” error. Think of how you shop for fruit. When you pick up an apple, you don’t look at the one shiny spot and say, “Hey, I’ll buy this apple.” Instead, you turn it over meticulously, looking for that one rotten spot. Likewise, on the reading comprehension answer choices, you shouldn’t just look at the part that’s right. Instead, you should “turn over” the entire answer choice, making sure that each word/phrase is valid.

Miscellaneous Reading Tips 1. Practice, as much as possible, using official material. Content-wise, nothing beats practicing with actual GRE questions from ETS. The style and tone of the passages, the way questions and answer choices are worded, and the subtlety between the correct answer and the incorrect answers can only be found in actual questions. 2. Know why the wrong answers are wrong. The wrong answers are the soul of the reading comprehension questions. Oftentimes, you may know the general answer to a question. General knowledge isn’t what the GRE is testing, though. It’s testing whether you can tell the difference between an answer choice that’s almost right and one that’s right. Only by having a strong sense of why the correct answer is correct and the incorrect answer incorrect will you truly have mastered a question. 3. Reread passages. Are you worried by the thought of practicing over and over with the same reading passages? It’s understandable, but unless you have an amazing, photographic memory, you’ll probably have forgotten most, if not all, of a passage you read six weeks ago. It’s also not about getting questions right. It’s about knowing why the correct answer is correct and the wrong answer wrong. The chances that you’ll remember the exact distinctions between answer choices are fairly small. Think of it this way: each time you go through the same passage and answer choices is a fresh opportunity to exercise your analytical muscles. 4. Be aware of your mistakes. Often, there’s a pattern to your mistakes. It could be that you infer too much on inference questions or that you often miss the single word in the passage that makes all the difference. It could be misinterpreting answer choices. Anticipating your personal common mistakes can help you improve.

