https://images.static-collegedunia.com/public/college_data/images/entrance/entrance_brochure/1608211068Magoosh%20GRE%20Prep.pdf?fbclid=IwZXh0bgNhZW0CMTEAAR34FJpZ2MD0JW54vn5F80EP6788XjVbcctVS5hfvoyl1sHbIC64NH5_hSM_aem_ZmFrZWR1bW15MTZieXRlcw

The sections 
The GRE consists of two Quantitative Reasoning sections, two Verbal 
Reasoning sections, and one experimental section, which can be either Verbal 
or Quantitative. In addition, there are two timed essay-writing assignments in 
the Analytical Writing Assessment (AWA) section of the GRE. The 
experimental section won’t count toward your score, but you won’t know 
which section is the experimental one. You should treat all sections like 
they’re the real deal. Both the overall GRE Verbal and GRE Quantitative 
scores can range from 130 to 170. The essays are scored from 0 to 6 in half
point increments. 
Number of questions and time limit 
The GRE Quantitative sections contain twenty questions each. You’ll be 
given thirty-five minutes to complete each section. The Verbal sections also 
consist of twenty questions each, but you’ll have just thirty minutes to 
complete those sections. 
GRE Quantitative overview 
The two sections in this category are made up of approximately seven 
quantitative comparison questions and thirteen non–quantitative comparison 
questions (don’t worry, we’ll explain comparison and non-comparison 
questions soon). Possible question types include the following (these four 
example practice questions will be explained starting on page 35; no need to 
worry about solving them now!):
GRE 语文概述

此类别中的两个部分各由大约六个文本填空题、四个句子等值题和十个阅读理解题组成。

文本填空：问题可以有一到三个空白，范围从短句到四句段落。对于双空白和三空白文本填空题，您必须正确回答每个空白才能获得满分 - 不会获得部分学分！

句子等值：有六个可能答案选项的问题。对于每个句子等值题，将有两个正确答案。要获得任何学分，您必须选择两个正确答案。

阅读理解：文章长度从十二行到六十行不等。主题内容通常具有学术性质，涵盖科学、文学和社会科学等领域。问题类型包括标准多项选择题、突出显示段落问题和多项答案问题，要求您从三个可能的答案选项中选择任意数量

How do I register for the GRE? 
You can register for the GRE by visiting ets.org/gre and creating a GRE 
account with ETS. The test is computer-delivered year-round, with the option 
of taking it up to three times a year. 
