https://www.halhigdon.com/training/marathon-training/

How long should you train for a marathon?
Generally speaking, it takes between 12 and 20 weeks to train for a marathon, but most plans are 16 to 20-weeks. No matter your level of experience, you do need three to six months to be ready to run this distance. The race is a marathon, but so is the training!

All the training plans include different types of runs such as intervals, hill workouts, easy recovery runs, and a long run. A great plan makes sure you don’t overdo things, so you gradually build up your mileage to at least 20 miles, have recovery weeks built in, and plenty of rest and cross-training days. A solid marathon training plan also includes a prerace taper.

Sometimes, it helps to have a tune-up race on the calendar, too. If you’re thinking about a half marathon or 10K before you kick off marathon training, we have a training plan for that, too, and you can tackle those races this summer!

 you’ve picked a race for the fall, here’s when you need to start training:
Start a 16-Week Marathon Training Plan for Fall
May 12 → race dates: August 31/September 1
May 19 → race dates: September 7/ September 8
May 26 → race dates: September 14/September 15
June 2 → September 21/September 22
June 9 → September 28/September 29
June 16 → October 5/October 6
June 23 → October 12/October 13
June 30 → October 19/October 20
July 7 → October 26/October 27
July 14 → November 2/November 3
July 21 → November 9/November 10
July 28 →November 16/November 17
August 4 → November 23/November 24
August 11 → November 30/December 1
August 18 → December 7/December 8
August 25 → December 14/December 15
What training plan should I use?
If you’re overwhelmed when you Google “marathon training plans,” you’re not alone.
Not only do you need a plan that gets you to the finish line, you need one that’s going to get you to the starting line feeling strong, healthy, and confident. That will look different to every single runner. Some people respond well to logging high mileage six days a week; others prefer lower-intensity plans that allow for more cross-training and fewer running days.
Run your first marathon
You should be able to run at least 6 miles and be used to working out regularly at a moderate to hard effort when you kick off this 16-week plan. The plan includes four days of easy running, one long run, and two rest days.
Break 4 hours
This is for a consistent runner used to regularly working out four to five times a week. The 16-week plan starts off with a 10-mile week and builds up to a 48-mile week, with your long run maxing out at 22 miles. This runner will be looking to complete 26.2 at a 9:09 pace.
Break 3:45
For the consistent runner looking to complete 26.2 miles at 8:33 pace, this 16-week plan works up to a 22-mile long run and incorporates interval workouts and tempo paces throughout.
Break 3:30
For the consistent runner looking to complete 26.2 miles at 8:00 pace, this 16-week plan starts off with 32 miles a week and peaks at a 52-mile week. It also incorporates intervals, hills, and tempo workouts.
Break 3:15
Opt for this training plan if you’re a consistent runner who has completed at least one marathon and can already run at a hard effort for over an hour. Peaking at a 52-mile week, you’ll see Yasso 800s, intervals, hills, and tempo efforts at the end of long runs.
Break 3 hours
For the marathoner with race experience who is aiming to run 26.2 miles at 6:52 pace per mile, this is our most advanced plan. It peaks at 56 miles for the week and puts a focus on speedwork and long runs that incorporate your goal pace.
What if I miss training time or suffer an injury?
It’s important to stick to your training plan in order to run your best race. However, no one’s training is perfect. Niggles, injuries, or other unexpected life events (such as having to work late or care for a sick family member) can pop up, leading you to miss some training time. Take a deep breath. It’s okay!
No training plan is set in stone, and if you’re unable to complete a specific workout on the day your plan calls for it because something unexpected comes up, there’s nothing wrong with swapping it for a different day or simply taking a day off.
If you feel an injury coming on or getting worse, you should stop and take a rest day or cross-train, then reassess. It’s ultimately better to skip a few training days to allow your body to rest than to continue running and risk a more serious injury that leaves you unable to run your marathon.
What if my training feels too difficult?
Marathon training is no easy feat—it requires a ton of dedication to long runs, tempo runs, speed workouts, and cross-training. At times, this can feel overbearing and difficult. You should be uncomfortable to some degree; that’s normal when growing in anything. But your training shouldn’t feel impossible.
If your marathon training feels too hard, consider factors like rest days, pain levels, and your mindset. Are you taking proper time to recover from your efforts? Are you ignoring aching muscles? Are you in the right headspace before and during your workouts? Consider these questions and use them to help determine if you need to back off your runs or put more time into recovery efforts.
What should I eat during training?
Proper nutrition during marathon training is essential for fueling your runs and recovering well.
While what you eat before a run can vary depending on the specific workout you’re doing, carbs are key in providing your body with energy to complete your run. Good options include a banana, oatmeal, a bagel, a honey packet, or any combination of these foods, depending on how long or intense your workout is.
After the first hours of your run, aim to fuel with 30 grams of carbs every 30 to 45 minutes. This can include gels, gummies, or easy-to-eat whole foods. Your stomach can absorb up to 60 grams of carbs per hour when diluted with water so be sure to also hydrate properly along the way.
To help you recover faster, eat foods that restore your muscles, strengthen your bones, and reduce inflammation is important. This includes foods that contain protein, healthy fats, carbs, antioxidants, and certain vitamins and minerals (such as vitamin D, calcium, and electrolytes).
Experiment with fuel during your training—not on race day!—because everyone tolerates foods differently. Get a good sense of what works best so you don’t have any unexpected stomach issues on race day.
