Quantum mechanics is the field of physics that explains how extremely small objects simultaneously have the characteristics of both particles (tiny pieces of matter) and waves (a disturbance or variation that transfers energy). Physicists call this the “wave-particle duality.”
The particle portion of the wave-particle duality involves how objects can be described as “quanta.” A quanta is the smallest discrete unit (such as a particle) of a natural phenomenon in a system where the units are in a bound state. For example, a quanta of electromagnetic radiation, or light, is a photon. A bound state is one where the particles are trapped. One example of a bound state is the electrons, neutrons, and protons that are in an atom.
To be “quantized” means the particles in a bound state can only have discrete values for properties such as energy or momentum. For example, an electron in an atom can only have very specific energy levels. This is different from our world of macroscopic particles, where these properties can be any value in a range. A baseball can have essentially any energy as it is thrown, travels through the air, gradually slows down, then stops.
At the same time, tiny quantized particles such as electrons can also be described as waves. Like a wave in the ocean in our macroscopic world – the world we can see with our eyes -- waves in the quantum world are constantly shifting. In quantum mechanics, scientists talk about a particle’s “wave function.” This is a mathematical representation used to describe the probability that a particle exists at a certain location at a certain time with a certain momentum.
The world of quantum mechanics is very different from how we usually see our macroscopic world, which is controlled by what physicists call classical mechanics. Quantum mechanics grew out of the tremendous progress that physicists made in the early 20th century toward understanding the microscopic world around us and how it differed from the macroscopic world.
As with many things in science, new discoveries prompted new questions. Prior to this time, scientists thought that light existed as an electromagnetic wave and that electrons existed as discrete, point-like particles. However, this created problems in explaining various phenomena in physics. These include blackbody radiation—the emission of light from objects based on their temperature. Quantum mechanics also helped explain the structure of the atom. It helped make sense of the photoelectric effect, which involves how materials emit electrons when those materials are hit with light of certain wavelengths. By explaining how things can be both particles and waves, quantum mechanics solved these problems.
This new knowledge had profound effects in science and technology. Quantum mechanics led to the development of things like lasers, light-emitting diodes, transistors, medical imaging, electron microscopes, and a host of other modern devices. Your cell phone would not exist without the science of quantum mechanics!
DOE Office of Science: Contributions to Quantum Mechanics
The Department of Energy Office of Science supports research in technology and science resulting from quantum mechanics. The Office of Science has many programs involved with quantum computing and quantum information science. In addition, modern scientific research supported by the Office of Science takes place within the framework of quantum mechanics. Accelerator facilities such as the Argonne Tandem Linac Accelerator System (ATLAS) at Argonne National Laboratory, Brookhaven National Laboratory’s Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), and Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility’s Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility all exist to study the properties of the smallest particles of nature. These tiny particles are controlled by the rules of quantum mechanics. Other facilities that study the quantized nature of particles include Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, the core U.S. particle physics lab. The Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) at Michigan State University exists to study the properties of exotic atomic nuclei.
Fast Facts
Many subatomic particles, including the proton, have angular momentum, which is often referred to as “spin.” Medical experts use this property in MRI imaging devices.
Smartphones contain billions of transistors that work based on the wave nature of electrons, which scientists understand through quantum mechanics.
Quantum computers and quantum networks are new applications of quantum mechanics that use the quantized nature of particles to store and transfer information.
Tunneling

Know about quantum tunneling and how it affects the way a particle behaves toward its barrier
Learn how quantum tunneling affects the way a particle reacts to barriers.(more)
See all videos for this article

tunneling
Figure 1: Classically, a particle is bound in the central region C if its energy E is less than V0, but in quantum theory the particle may tunnel through the potential barrier and escape.(more)
The phenomenon of tunneling, which has no counterpart in classical physics, is an important consequence of quantum mechanics. Consider a particle with energy E in the inner region of a one-dimensional potential well V(x), as shown in Figure 1. (A potential well is a potential that has a lower value in a certain region of space than in the neighbouring regions.) In classical mechanics, if E < V0 (the maximum height of the potential barrier), the particle remains in the well forever; if E > V0, the particle escapes. In quantum mechanics, the situation is not so simple. The particle can escape even if its energy E is below the height of the barrier V0, although the probability of escape is small unless E is close to V0. In that case, the particle may tunnel through the potential barrier and emerge with the same energy E.
The phenomenon of tunneling has many important applications. For example, it describes a type of radioactive decay in which a nucleus emits an alpha particle (a helium nucleus). According to the quantum explanation given independently by George Gamow and by Ronald W. Gurney and Edward Condon in 1928, the alpha particle is confined before the decay by a potential of the shape shown in Figure 1. For a given nuclear species, it is possible to measure the energy E of the emitted alpha particle and the average lifetime τ of the nucleus before decay. The lifetime of the nucleus is a measure of the probability of tunneling through the barrier—the shorter the lifetime, the higher the probability. With plausible assumptions about the general form of the potential function, it is possible to calculate a relationship between τ and E that is applicable to all alpha emitters. This theory, which is borne out by experiment, shows that the probability of tunneling, and hence the value of τ, is extremely sensitive to the value of E. For all known alpha-particle emitters, the value of E varies from about 2 to 8 million electron volts, or MeV (1 MeV = 106 electron volts). Thus, the value of E varies only by a factor of 4, whereas the range of τ is from about 1011 years down to about 10−6 second, a factor of 1024. It would be difficult to account for this sensitivity of τ to the value of E by any theory other than quantum mechanical tunneling.

More From Britannica
principles of physical science: Rise of quantum mechanics

Axiomatic approach
Although the two Schrödinger equations form an important part of quantum mechanics, it is possible to present the subject in a more general way. Dirac gave an elegant exposition of an axiomatic approach based on observables and states in a classic textbook entitled The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. (The book, published in 1930, is still in print.) An observable is anything that can be measured—energy, position, a component of angular momentum, and so forth. Every observable has a set of states, each state being represented by an algebraic function. With each state is associated a number that gives the result of a measurement of the observable. Consider an observable with N states, denoted by ψ1, ψ2, . . ., ψN, and corresponding measurement values a1, a2, . . ., aN. A physical system—e.g., an atom in a particular state—is represented by a wave function Ψ, which can be expressed as a linear combination, or mixture, of the states of the observable. Thus, the Ψ may be written asFor a given Ψ, the quantities c1, c2, etc., are a set of numbers that can be calculated. In general, the numbers are complex, but, in the present discussion, they are assumed to be real numbers.
The theory postulates, first, that the result of a measurement must be an a-value—i.e., a1, a2, or a3, etc. No other value is possible. Second, before the measurement is made, the probability of obtaining the value a1 is c12, and that of obtaining the value a2 is c22, and so on. If the value obtained is, say, a5, the theory asserts that after the measurement the state of the system is no longer the original Ψ but has changed to ψ5, the state corresponding to a5.
A number of consequences follow from these assertions. First, the result of a measurement cannot be predicted with certainty. Only the probability of a particular result can be predicted, even though the initial state (represented by the function Ψ) is known exactly. Second, identical measurements made on a large number of identical systems, all in the identical state Ψ, will produce different values for the measurements. This is, of course, quite contrary to classical physics and common sense, which say that the same measurement on the same object in the same state must produce the same result. Moreover, according to the theory, not only does the act of measurement change the state of the system, but it does so in an indeterminate way. Sometimes it changes the state to ψ1, sometimes to ψ2, and so forth.
There is an important exception to the above statements. Suppose that, before the measurement is made, the state Ψ happens to be one of the ψs—say, Ψ = ψ3. Then c3 = 1 and all the other cs are zero. This means that, before the measurement is made, the probability of obtaining the value a3 is unity and the probability of obtaining any other value of a is zero. In other words, in this particular case, the result of the measurement can be predicted with certainty. Moreover, after the measurement is made, the state will be ψ3, the same as it was before. Thus, in this particular case, measurement does not disturb the system. Whatever the initial state of the system, two measurements made in rapid succession (so that the change in the wave function given by the time-dependent Schrödinger equation is negligible) produce the same result.
The value of one observable can be determined by a single measurement. The value of two observables for a given system may be known at the same time, provided that the two observables have the same set of state functions ψ1, ψ2, . . ., ψN. In this case, measuring the first observable results in a state function that is one of the ψs. Because this is also a state function of the second observable, the result of measuring the latter can be predicted with certainty. Thus the values of both observables are known. (Although the ψs are the same for the two observables, the two sets of a values are, in general, different.) The two observables can be measured repeatedly in any sequence. After the first measurement, none of the measurements disturbs the system, and a unique pair of values for the two observables is obtained.
Incompatible observables
The measurement of two observables with different sets of state functions is a quite different situation. Measurement of one observable gives a certain result. The state function after the measurement is, as always, one of the states of that observable; however, it is not a state function for the second observable. Measuring the second observable disturbs the system, and the state of the system is no longer one of the states of the first observable. In general, measuring the first observable again does not produce the same result as the first time. To sum up, both quantities cannot be known at the same time, and the two observables are said to be incompatible.

magnet in Stern-Gerlach experiment
Figure 2: N and S are the north and south poles of a magnet. The knife-edge of S results in a much stronger magnetic field at the point P than at Q.(more)

measurement of angular momentum components
Figure 3: Measurements of the x and y components of angular momentum for silver atoms, S, in the ground state. A, B, and C are magnets with inhomogeneous magnetic fields. The arrows show the average direction of each magnetic field.(more)
A specific example of this behaviour is the measurement of the component of angular momentum along two mutually perpendicular directions. The Stern-Gerlach experiment mentioned above involved measuring the angular momentum of a silver atom in the ground state. In reconstructing this experiment, a beam of silver atoms is passed between the poles of a magnet. The poles are shaped so that the magnetic field varies greatly in strength over a very small distance (Figure 2). The apparatus determines the ms quantum number, which can be +1/2 or −1/2. No other values are obtained. Thus in this case the observable has only two states—i.e., N = 2. The inhomogeneous magnetic field produces a force on the silver atoms in a direction that depends on the spin state of the atoms. The result is shown schematically in Figure 3. A beam of silver atoms is passed through magnet A. The atoms in the state with ms = +1/2 are deflected upward and emerge as beam 1, while those with ms = −1/2 are deflected downward and emerge as beam 2. If the direction of the magnetic field is the x-axis, the apparatus measures Sx, which is the x-component of spin angular momentum. The atoms in beam 1 have Sx = +ℏ/2 while those in beam 2 have Sx = −ℏ/2. In a classical picture, these two states represent atoms spinning about the direction of the x-axis with opposite senses of rotation.
The y-component of spin angular momentum Sy also can have only the values +ℏ/2 and −ℏ/2; however, the two states of Sy are not the same as for Sx. In fact, each of the states of Sx is an equal mixture of the states for Sy, and conversely. Again, the two Sy states may be pictured as representing atoms with opposite senses of rotation about the y-axis. These classical pictures of quantum states are helpful, but only up to a certain point. For example, quantum theory says that each of the states corresponding to spin about the x-axis is a superposition of the two states with spin about the y-axis. There is no way to visualize this; it has absolutely no classical counterpart. One simply has to accept the result as a consequence of the axioms of the theory. Suppose that, as in Figure 3, the atoms in beam 1 are passed into a second magnet B, which has a magnetic field along the y-axis perpendicular to x. The atoms emerge from B and go in equal numbers through its two output channels. Classical theory says that the two magnets together have measured both the x- and y-components of spin angular momentum and that the atoms in beam 3 have Sx = +ℏ/2, Sy = +ℏ/2, while those in beam 4 have Sx = +ℏ/2, Sy = −ℏ/2. However, classical theory is wrong, because if beam 3 is put through still another magnet C, with its magnetic field along x, the atoms divide equally into beams 5 and 6 instead of emerging as a single beam 5 (as they would if they had Sx = +ℏ/2). Thus, the correct statement is that the beam entering B has Sx = +ℏ/2 and is composed of an equal mixture of the states Sy = +ℏ/2 and Sy = −ℏ/2—i.e., the x-component of angular momentum is known but the y-component is not. Correspondingly, beam 3 leaving B has Sy = +ℏ/2 and is an equal mixture of the states Sx = +ℏ/2 and Sx = −ℏ/2; the y-component of angular momentum is known but the x-component is not. The information about Sx is lost because of the disturbance caused by magnet B in the measurement of Sy.
Heisenberg uncertainty principle
The observables discussed so far have had discrete sets of experimental values. For example, the values of the energy of a bound system are always discrete, and angular momentum components have values that take the form mℏ, where m is either an integer or a half-integer, positive or negative. On the other hand, the position of a particle or the linear momentum of a free particle can take continuous values in both quantum and classical theory. The mathematics of observables with a continuous spectrum of measured values is somewhat more complicated than for the discrete case but presents no problems of principle. An observable with a continuous spectrum of measured values has an infinite number of state functions. The state function Ψ of the system is still regarded as a combination of the state functions of the observable, but the sum in equation (10) must be replaced by an integral.

light passing through a slit
Figure 4: (A) Parallel monochromatic light incident normally on a slit, (B) variation in the intensity of the light with direction after it has passed through the slit. If the experiment is repeated with electrons instead of light, the same diagram would represent the variation in the intensity (i.e., relative number) of the electrons.(more)
Measurements can be made of position x of a particle and the x-component of its linear momentum, denoted by px. These two observables are incompatible because they have different state functions. The phenomenon of diffraction noted above illustrates the impossibility of measuring position and momentum simultaneously and precisely. If a parallel monochromatic light beam passes through a slit (Figure 4A), its intensity varies with direction, as shown in Figure 4B. The light has zero intensity in certain directions. Wave theory shows that the first zero occurs at an angle θ0, given by sin θ0 = λ/b, where λ is the wavelength of the light and b is the width of the slit. If the width of the slit is reduced, θ0 increases—i.e., the diffracted light is more spread out. Thus, θ0 measures the spread of the beam.
The experiment can be repeated with a stream of electrons instead of a beam of light. According to de Broglie, electrons have wavelike properties; therefore, the beam of electrons emerging from the slit should widen and spread out like a beam of light waves. This has been observed in experiments. If the electrons have velocity u in the forward direction (i.e., the y-direction in Figure 4A), their (linear) momentum is p = meu. Consider px, the component of momentum in the x-direction. After the electrons have passed through the aperture, the spread in their directions results in an uncertainty in px by an amountwhere λ is the wavelength of the electrons and, according to the de Broglie formula, equals h/p. Thus, Δpx ≈ h/b. Exactly where an electron passed through the slit is unknown; it is only certain that an electron went through somewhere. Therefore, immediately after an electron goes through, the uncertainty in its x-position is Δx ≈ b/2. Thus, the product of the uncertainties is of the order of ℏ. More exact analysis shows that the product has a lower limit, given by
This is the well-known Heisenberg uncertainty principle for position and momentum. It states that there is a limit to the precision with which the position and the momentum of an object can be measured at the same time. Depending on the experimental conditions, either quantity can be measured as precisely as desired (at least in principle), but the more precisely one of the quantities is measured, the less precisely the other is known.
The uncertainty principle is significant only on the atomic scale because of the small value of h in everyday units. If the position of a macroscopic object with a mass of, say, one gram is measured with a precision of 10−6 metre, the uncertainty principle states that its velocity cannot be measured to better than about 10−25 metre per second. Such a limitation is hardly worrisome. However, if an electron is located in an atom about 10−10 metre across, the principle gives a minimum uncertainty in the velocity of about 106 metre per second.
The above reasoning leading to the uncertainty principle is based on the wave-particle duality of the electron. When Heisenberg first propounded the principle in 1927 his reasoning was based, however, on the wave-particle duality of the photon. He considered the process of measuring the position of an electron by observing it in a microscope. Diffraction effects due to the wave nature of light result in a blurring of the image; the resulting uncertainty in the position of the electron is approximately equal to the wavelength of the light. To reduce this uncertainty, it is necessary to use light of shorter wavelength—e.g., gamma rays. However, in producing an image of the electron, the gamma-ray photon bounces off the electron, giving the Compton effect (see above Early developments: Scattering of X-rays). As a result of the collision, the electron recoils in a statistically random way. The resulting uncertainty in the momentum of the electron is proportional to the momentum of the photon, which is inversely proportional to the wavelength of the photon. So it is again the case that increased precision in knowledge of the position of the electron is gained only at the expense of decreased precision in knowledge of its momentum. A detailed calculation of the process yields the same result as before (equation [12]). Heisenberg’s reasoning brings out clearly the fact that the smaller the particle being observed, the more significant is the uncertainty principle. When a large body is observed, photons still bounce off it and change its momentum, but, considered as a fraction of the initial momentum of the body, the change is insignificant.
The Schrödinger and Dirac theories give a precise value for the energy of each stationary state, but in reality the states do not have a precise energy. The only exception is in the ground (lowest energy) state. Instead, the energies of the states are spread over a small range. The spread arises from the fact that, because the electron can make a transition to another state, the initial state has a finite lifetime. The transition is a random process, and so different atoms in the same state have different lifetimes. If the mean lifetime is denoted as τ, the theory shows that the energy of the initial state has a spread of energy ΔE, given by
This energy spread is manifested in a spread in the frequencies of emitted radiation. Therefore, the spectral lines are not infinitely sharp. (Some experimental factors can also broaden a line, but their effects can be reduced; however, the present effect, known as natural broadening, is fundamental and cannot be reduced.) Equation (13) is another type of Heisenberg uncertainty relation; generally, if a measurement with duration τ is made of the energy in a system, the measurement disturbs the system, causing the energy to be uncertain by an amount ΔE, the magnitude of which is given by the above equation.
Quantum electrodynamics
The application of quantum theory to the interaction between electrons and radiation requires a quantum treatment of Maxwell’s field equations, which are the foundations of electromagnetism, and the relativistic theory of the electron formulated by Dirac (see above Electron spin and antiparticles). The resulting quantum field theory is known as quantum electrodynamics, or QED.
QED accounts for the behaviour and interactions of electrons, positrons, and photons. It deals with processes involving the creation of material particles from electromagnetic energy and with the converse processes in which a material particle and its antiparticle annihilate each other and produce energy. Initially the theory was beset with formidable mathematical difficulties, because the calculated values of quantities such as the charge and mass of the electron proved to be infinite. However, an ingenious set of techniques developed (in the late 1940s) by Hans Bethe, Julian S. Schwinger, Tomonaga Shin’ichirō, Richard P. Feynman, and others dealt systematically with the infinities to obtain finite values of the physical quantities. Their method is known as renormalization. The theory has provided some remarkably accurate predictions.
According to the Dirac theory, two particular states in hydrogen with different quantum numbers have the same energy. QED, however, predicts a small difference in their energies; the difference may be determined by measuring the frequency of the electromagnetic radiation that produces transitions between the two states. This effect was first measured by Willis E. Lamb, Jr., and Robert Retherford in 1947. Its physical origin lies in the interaction of the electron with the random fluctuations in the surrounding electromagnetic field. These fluctuations, which exist even in the absence of an applied field, are a quantum phenomenon. The accuracy of experiment and theory in this area may be gauged by two recent values for the separation of the two states, expressed in terms of the frequency of the radiation that produces the transitions:
An even more spectacular example of the success of QED is provided by the value for μe, the magnetic dipole moment of the free electron. Because the electron is spinning and has electric charge, it behaves like a tiny magnet, the strength of which is expressed by the value of μe. According to the Dirac theory, μe is exactly equal to μB = eℏ/2me, a quantity known as the Bohr magneton; however, QED predicts that μe = (1 + a)μB, where a is a small number, approximately 1/860. Again, the physical origin of the QED correction is the interaction of the electron with random oscillations in the surrounding electromagnetic field. The best experimental determination of μe involves measuring not the quantity itself but the small correction term μe − μB. This greatly enhances the sensitivity of the experiment. The most recent results for the value of a are
Since a itself represents a small correction term, the magnetic dipole moment of the electron is measured with an accuracy of about one part in 1011. One of the most precisely determined quantities in physics, the magnetic dipole moment of the electron can be calculated correctly from quantum theory to within about one part in 1010
