https://www.trailrunnermag.com/training/trail-tips-training/the-science-behind-how-elite-runners-train/

Running training for people can vary depending on their goals and fitness level:
Beginners
Start slowly and focus on increasing time spent running before building up speed, stamina, and mileage. For example, try running for one minute, walking for two minutes, and repeating.
Marathon training
In the final weeks of training, reduce the volume of each run by about one third two weeks out and about half in race week. You can also try banking your longest run three to four weeks out, then reducing it to 1:45 two weeks out, and 75 minutes one week out.
World-class runners
May include two to three sessions per week of heavy load training to develop strength and power, along with plyometric work. However, as runners approach a race pace phase, they may need to reduce strength and conditioning to once a week to avoid fatigue. 


Gradually increase the frequency of training sessions
Add in more difficult terrain, such as hills
Increase the number of interval sessions
Use psychological tricks like music and setting clear goals to help with mental toughness

The competition phase is a continuation of the specific preparation phase, with more races and recovery. The transition phase might be called an “off-season” in other contexts, and it can vary from 1 to 2 weeks of rest/low-intensity running to 4 weeks totally off. Off-seasons are not set-in-stone rules, they can be flexible based on the needs and background of the athlete, and can involve aerobic running and other activities.

A couple more interesting wrinkles for track runners: none of the athletes analyzed did any “over-distance” races (i.e. half marathons) in the 3-4 months leading up to 5k/10k championships, and their last race prior to championship competition was ~4 weeks before. Racing well beyond target distances may come with some drawbacks, particularly for very fast athletes.


  Marathon runners approached it differently. They raced less, with just 6 competitions per year, with an average of 2 marathons per year separated by at least 3 months. That may be a lesson to trail and ultra runners to avoid an extremely high density of long races for peak performance. 
While the general preparation phase/base building looks similar, marathon runners diverge from track runners with slower race-paced work in the specific preparation phase, and sometimes having their highest volumes of all directly preceding the taper. Athletes doing longer races may want to consider having their volume peak in the 2-4 weeks before their key races.

For many runners, 2-3 speed sessions a week may be overdoing it, particularly with uphills on trails often leading to higher heart rate. But the 2-3 session framework is a good way to think about runs when you let your heart rate get higher and the effort go up for a substantial portion of the run.
In the article, sessions included fartleks (30-60 minutes of running broken up with periods of intensity), threshold runs (20-50 minutes around half marathon effort), threshold intervals (3-15 minute intervals at half marathon effort totaling 30-75 minutes of intense effort), VO2 max intervals (2-4 minute duration at 3-10k effort with 2-3 minute recovery, totaling 15-20 minutes intervals), and hill repeats (30 seconds to 4 minutes duration at 5-10% grade). Athletes also did plenty of fast strides. Table 2 is worth a click–it’s like the ingredients list at the start of a kickass recipe for fitness.


   Training Volume
World-leading marathon runners train 500-700 hours per year, with track runners between 450 and 600 hours, spread out over 11-14 sessions (doubles are nearly ubiquitous). Interestingly, this is less time than sports like cross-country skiing, triathlon, and swimming, where athletes are often around 800-1200 hours per year. Running is weight-bearing, so the importance of injury prevention is key, rather than volume accumulation for its own sake. 
To zoom out for a second, it’s helpful to think about one of the shortcomings of looking at the training of the best in the world, rather than a broader cohort of athletes. With 59 world-leading athletes included, I think it’s a conservative estimate that 59,000 athletes trained as hard as they could with the same big goals. We aren’t seeing those other 58,941 training logs, which is likely explained by genetics and random chance mixed together to lead to earlier stagnation or injury. If you throw 59,000 eggs at a wall and 59 don’t break, it doesn’t mean we should emulate every aspect of what those 59 did. That’s especially important when it comes to very high training volumes.


